Every entrepreneur fights a never ending, multi-front battle against an invisible enemy.

This enemy will not stop until it renders their idea a smoldering pile of crushed dreams and wasted opportunities.

This battle will test every single fiber of an entrepreneurs being. It’s down right crazy to have the confidence, ego, grit, determination, and creativity to believe that you can battle this invisible foe to shift the world around to your point of view.

Thousands of companies get started each year to buck the trend, disrupt the market, change the paradigm, and put their dents in the universe. The people who start these companies are often ridiculed for thinking that they and they alone have the next Facebook, Twitter, Tesla, Apple, Microsoft, Twitch, Twillo, Cruise Automation or insert your favorite unicorn here. Most of these companies will fail but thousands will try anyway even though the odds are stacked against them.

Who are these crazy people?

Entrepreneurs come in many forms yet they all tend to show similar traits, values, and beliefs. This entrepreneur tradecraft is what they use to get the job done yet just having the skills is not enough. Success is never assured.

One thing to clarify right up front. This book is not about how to become a successful entrepreneur. Sure, there are plenty of successful entrepreneurs that we will discuss, dissect and admire but this book is not going to give you the magic formula or the 7 steps or how to be an overnight success or any of those other click bait headlines I’m so fond of clicking on The Facebook.

What this book will do is describe the entrepreneurial culture with its traits, values, and beliefs that not only create great products but are also responsible for making society better. Without entrepreneurs, some of the greatest and most significant innovations would not exist.

For most entrepreneurs, success is not measured in the size of their bank account nor being on the cover of Fast Company nor the number of Twitter followers they have. All those perks are great but fleeting. In fact, most will never see the stellar returns of an Apple, Microsoft, Facebook, YouTube, or Instagram. That’s just reality.

Success for most entrepreneurs is being able to create their own life on their own terms. It’s more about freedom, creativity and challenges than money, fame and prestige since the latter are elusive and fleeting. Sure, every entrepreneur wants stellar returns for their investors and who would not want to have their handsome mug on the cover of Fast Company. 

Before we dig into the reasons, values, traits and beliefs of the entrepreneurial culture, lets explore what an entrepreneur is.

Merriam-Webster defines an entrepreneur as 

one who organizes, manages, and assumes the risks of a business or enterprise. 

The origin of entrepreneur comes from the old French word entreprendre, to undertake. Credit for coining the term usually goes to French economist Jean-Baptist Say but some argue that Irish-French economist Richard Cantillon defined it first in his book: Essay on the Nature of Trade in General.

Cantillon’s definition defined an entrepreneur as a risk-taker while Say’s definition focused more on the entrepreneur as a planner. Cantillon’s definition is more aligned to the modern entrepreneur. Taking on, dealing with, and mitigating risk is one of the many jobs of the modern entrepreneur. It’s obvious but worth saying that without risk, there would be no need for entrepreneurs. 

Entrepreneurs are different than small business owners or CEO’s of multi-national corporations. Sure, all of them take on risk but the entrepreneur’s risk is far more complex and is more often than not, unknown. These unknown risks are uncomfortable for most people. This is one of the fundamental differences between entrepreneurs and the rest of the business world — entrepreneurs are comfortable with being uncomfortable.

I feel that the idea of being comfortable with being uncomfortable is at the heart of entrepreneurship. What the Merriam-Webster definition misses is the complexity of the risks that a business or enterprise takes on coupled with the invisible enemy of entrepreneurs. This is what makes being an entrepreneur so challenging and not for everyone.

My own 20+ year, 6 company journey with entrepreneurship has taught me a lot. Some lessons have been painful while others have been learned by being lucky enough to have great people around me showing me the way. Hindsight is a great teacher and it has taught me so much about why the entrepreneurial journey is not for everyone. The one consistent and undeniable truth that my journey has taught me is this — inertia is the invisible enemy of all entrepreneurs.

Market inertia for the product or service they want to create.

Investor inertia to fund their company.

Co-founder inertia on the direction that the company should take.

Employee inertia to convince top talent to risk their careers on their half baked idea.

Family and friend inertia that risk wealth and patience to put up with the intense hours and insane drive to make things happen.

And finally, self-doubt inertia in having the guts to fight against crazy odds to bring to life something that has not existed before.

A solid appreciation of the battle against inertia is paramount to success. This inertia, from the outside, may seem too high or even crazy, yet entrepreneurs don’t just jump in to a situation without as much knowledge as practical. 

It’s the battle against inertia and the calculated risks that come along challenging the status quo that each and every entrepreneur battles daily.

For those of you who are not familiar with the term inertia, let me explain.

Inertia is a physics term that means

a tendency to do nothing or to remain unchanged unless acted upon by an outside force.

So inertia is the tendency for things to not want to change. Put it another way, it’s the status quo of the world which we all know can be nearly impossible to budge. Thus the reason it’s so hard to create a successful company.

The companies that I have founded or been a part of all battled inertia on many front and each one had to navigate a turbulent sea of risks to be successful. All this inertia and risks changed over time and had to be constantly evaluated to determine if we were making the right assumptions and decisions.

So then, what’s The Entrepreneur Ethos?

Ethos comes from Greek and going back to Merriam-Webster, is defined as:

the distinguishing character, sentiment, moral nature, or guiding beliefs of a person, group, or institution

Thus, The Entrepreneur Ethos is the distinguishing set of traits, values, beliefs, and attitudes that form the foundation of the entrepreneurial culture.

As we explore The Entrepreneur Ethos, I will modify the Merriam-Webster definition of an entrepreneur as follows:

one who organizes, manages, and fights against inertia to create a business or enterprise that has not existed before.

In my mind, the fight against inertia in it’s many forms, will keep many an entrepreneur up at night. In some respects, that’s a good thing since more and more people are starting companies and the data shows that we are now entering the age of the entrepreneur.

Historically, humans have always been entrepreneurial. Just image being around some 30,000 years ago and being the first entrepreneurs to figure out how to hunt and process food on a large scale. This group of people formed a collective that benefited from collaboration and the techniques they used. This might not seem entrepreneurial but it does highlight that the ability to solve problems and create something new has been with us for thousands of years.

Fast forward to the last day of the 1600’s where modern entrepreneurship can trace its roots to the formation of an entity which will not only return vast wealth to it’s shareholders but will also create the foundation of the modern corporation. This corporation not only set in motion the modern structure that most corporations adhere to today but it will also be patient 0 for the demise of free agents (the precursor to modern entrepreneurs) that have only recently been resurrected and transformed into modern day entrepreneurs. This innovative company was the British East India Trading Company (EIC).

EIC was established by Royal Charter on December 31st, 1600. What was unique about EIC is that while formed by Royal Charter, the government of Queen Elizabeth had only indirect control — wealthy merchants and aristocrats owned all the shares. That was a major shift for the time and is important since at one point, the company accounted for half of the worlds trade and even had it own private armies to ensure trade flowed freely.

Of course, business existed before EIC but what was unique and novel about EIC and what matters to entrepreneurs is what Venkatesh Rao wrote about in A Brief History of the Corporation: 

Guilds and banks have existed since the 16th century. Trading merchants, who raised capital to fund individual ships or voyages, often with some royal patronage, were also not a new phenomenon. What was new was the idea of a publicly traded joint-stock corporation, an entity with rights similar to those of states and individuals, with limited liability and significant autonomy (even in its earliest days, when corporations were formed for defined periods of time by royal charter).

The idea of a standalone entity that has “rights and limited liability” has allowed entrepreneurs to take risks without the consequences that a sole-proprietor would have to take on except for the loss of capital. The powerful part was a legal way to bind together capital from private parties in a way where legal rights were maintained. Today, this sounds trivial but 400 years ago, this was magical.

What entrepreneurs need to focus on is not the birth of the corporation nor it’s rise to prominence but rather it’s decline to what we are experiencing now — the age of the entrepreneur. Corporations peaked around 1980 when over 80% of Americans got a paycheck from a corporation from a low of about 20% in 1780.

The decline of the corporate stems from a couple of things. The first is stricter regulations, which have slowly eroded their advantages. Usually, these restrictions happen during market busts where governments take actions to prevent more boom/bust cycles. The second, more important piece, is the democratization of the means production and distribution coupled with innovative ways to do business.

Modern day entrepreneurs have it a lot easier than even 20 years ago. The cost of production, distribution and marketing are drastically cheaper than the Don Draper generation. Anyone with a good idea can start a crowd funding campaign on Indiegogo and try their hand at entrepreneurship. 3D printing is another technology that makes it cheaper and quicker to make a prototype than ever before. The Internet has truly democratized entrepreneurship and the reason why I feel we are in the age of the entrepreneur and why it’s important to create an ethos that entrepreneurs should strive to follow.

I’m glad you choose to join me in this journey to explore what it means to be an entrepreneur and the ethos that we all follow.

One final thing. 

I have complied all of my source notes in the back of this book by chapter but did not create specific references for specific facts or paragraphs. I did this because I did not want to distract from the flow and narrative of the book The sources of facts, figures, and stories should be apparent from the source note descriptions. If not, my apologies.

Now, let’s get after it!

Jarie Bolander
Silicon Valley
August 2016