“Better three hours too soon than a minute too late” — William Shakespeare

Alta Vista, launched in 1994, was the first natural language search engine for web pages. Back then, less than 14% of US adults used the Internet. By the time Google came around in 1998, 36% of US adults were on the Internet and the growth was accelerating. Timing matters a lot. Have you heard for Alta Vista lately?

No idea, no matter how good or innovative, will be successful if there is no market for it. Even more important than a market is market timing. Timing  can make or break an idea or company. Even well established companies can fall victim to marketing timing if they don’t see how technology might be changing the market (more on that later).

Another company that missed marketing time was Blockbuster.

Blockbuster was a powerhouse in the video industry. As a kid, I loved going to Blockbuster with my family to rent a couple of movies for the weekend. It was fun to browse all the new titles and fight with my two brothers as to which movie we got to play first. The good old days of be kind and rewind.

At its peak in 2004, Blockbuster had ~60,000 employees and over 9,000 stories yet just 6 years later, it filed for bankruptcy. What happened?

Netflix happened.

Netflix was started by Reed Hastings back in 1998 because he was an unsatisfied Blockbuster customer. Back then, most did not take Netflix seriously, including Blockbuster, because who would not want to browse for videos with the family on a Friday night or God forbid, wait for a movie to be shipped to you. It just seems like a niche that would never take off until you look a little deeper into how Blockbuster was making money.

It turns out that Blockbuster earned a tremendous amount of money from late fees and that was it’s achilles heel. Making money off of penalizing your customers will eventually piss them off. A pissed off customer will actively look for an alternative to solve their problem and that’s exactly what Netflix offered.

Netflix had several advantages for customers. The biggest one was that you could keep a movie as long as you wanted without any annoying late fees (Blockbuster made over 20% of their profits on late fees).The selection was a lot bigger and probably the most important feature, ironically, was that it was delivered right to your door — a precursor to todays on demand Uber economy. All of these features were not popular at first but as Netflix grew and word of mouth spread that it was easy to use, people adopted it and left Blockbuster in the dust.

The story of Blockbusters demise and Netflix rise has to do with more than timing. Clearly, there were other factors. In fact, Reed met with Blockbuster back in 2000 to pitch the idea of merging and was laughed out of the room but that’s for another time.

Timing is something that is hard to get right. There are so many confounding factors that contribute to being too early or too late with a product offering or service. Entrepreneurs need to constantly scan the marketplace for the best time to launch a product or service yet timing market timing is not the only timing to worry about.

Timing has another aspect that’s a little more personal and also conspires against us — when to take the jump and start something.

Anand, an entrepreneur in the SaaS data analytics space, sums up the right time to start something:

There is never really a perfect time. When we get this or that lined up. It’s hard to get everything lined up. At the end of the day you have to leap and just get it done. Have enough money to survive. You can only prepare so much. You have to have the basics and got the prep work done. There is no perfect time to pull the trigger. I wanted to start something earlier but I did not just.

I share Anand’s thoughts on this. When I started Lab Sensor Solutions, the timing was not ideal. I had a cushy corporate job that paid the bills but had a bunch of personal issues happening — not the ideal time to take a risk. Yet, my co-founders and I realized that we needed to get started since several factors were building up to a real need in the marketplace. I decided to leave the safety of corporate life and jump.

Not everything has worked out perfectly. As of this writing, we are still a little early to the market but all the signs that it will take off are positive. Taking the leap when I did was the right move.

Tim, an entrepreneur in the import/export business, knows that it can be frustrating waiting for things to happen:

It’s important to have a positive attitude and to see reality. Be persistent . The timing may be wrong and that will make you feel lousy. It can be a lonely time. Don’t let small things bother you. The time will come. The question is will you be ready for it.

Patience is different than procrastinating. It makes a lot of sense to plan out when you’ll make a move but not wait too long for the exact right time. The art is knowing what’s being patient and what’s procrastinating.

Each of us has constraints on our time. It seems like it’s never the right time to take the plunge and start a new company. The inertia of time, with it’s never ending parade of excuses like I’ll do it next year, when the kids go to school, when I have enough savings, when my idea is more solidified or after I get that bonus. All of these are “valid” reasons to delay yet if you think long and hard about these excuses, you’ll realize that there will always be an excuse to not start. So what’s stopping you?

That’s the inertia of timing. It will always make you err on the side of the comfortable, wait till a rainy day excuses that push off making the tough decision to make something happen. Everyone goes through it, so don’t beat yourself up too much.

Timing will always be something that entrepreneurs worry about. Time will conspire against you and make it that much more challenging to succeed. Time is never on your side.