“United We Stand, Divided We Fall” — Aesop

Good talent starts from the top and there is no better example of bad talent ruining a company than Dov Charney of American Apparel.

American Apparel was the darling of the garment industry. Founded in 1989, it quickly expanded to 6,700 employees and 197 stores by 2008. That all started to crumble when immigration issues, sexual harassment suits as well as allegations of physical abuse started to surface. In 2015, American Apparel filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy.

Without the right talent, no idea can ever get off the ground. Talent is not just technical talent. Talent encompass every single person that is required to bring whatever idea the entrepreneur has to a successful outcome. Get the talent right and pretty much any idea can make it.

Talent matters.

Talent is probably the single most important factor in success for a company — especially at a startup. Of all the things that could go wrong in a startup, the number one reason a startup fails is due to founder conflicts. CNN Money put it perfect in a 2014 article quoting Noam Wasserman of Harvard Business School:

In fact, 65% of high-potential startups fail as a result of conflict among co-founders, according to Noam Wasserman, a professor at Harvard Business School who studied 10,000 founders for his book "The Founder's Dilemma." Pairs and groups bring a variety of skills, but there is also more potential for conflict -- over leadership, money, strategy, credit and blame.

65% is a huge number and that’s only with co-founders. Just image how co-founder conflict seeps its way into the hearts and minds of the employees who are working incredibly hard to bring your vision to reality. Pure nightmare.

Jason, an entrepreneur who has founded several companies, has a similar take to professor Wasserman’s but with a twist:

There are well understood traits of entrepreneurs. Determined. Gritty. Hubris. In retrospect, you can’t tell the difference between success and failure. It’s not true that everyone should be an entrepreneur. They may not be as fulfilled.

Startups that have single founders tend to fail but in contrast is that the number one reason for failure is founder issues. You need a lot of stuff to succeed. You need hubris to start. Too much hubris can lead to bad things. Common traits that lead to success but also lead to the downfall and blow up the company. 

Let’s say you want to break the land speed record. You’re going to need a rocket for that because all of them that have tried, had rockets yet that rocket can also kill you.

The skills and resources you need to succeed is also the stuff that might kill you.

Investors also know that the talent is important and are always sizing up the founders and the company they keep.

Los Angels based VC Mark Suster sums up the criteria he looks for in a founder. Mark is not to bent on having multiple founders right away:

As a starting point I have to believe the founder has the attributes of an entrepreneur that matter most to me: Tenacity, resiliency, inspiration, perspiration, attention-to-detail, competitiveness, decisiveness, risk tolerance and integrity.

I have to believe the founder is cost-focused, mission-driven and aligned on cultural values to me, which mostly relates to integrity and how to treat other people.

Wise words indeed. 

It’s easy to get lured into a situation with a brilliant asshole founder especially if they have had a record of success. It’s tempting to forgo the personality issues and crass attitude towards underlings and charge ahead. Given professor Wasserman’s findings, that would be a big mistake.

People make a company. Choosing the wrong people will make it harder to recruit and more challenging to build a world class product. Why make an already challenging task even harder?

Of course, this is easier said than done. It’s always going to be a challenge to get along with a group of people under stressful circumstances. Humans are messy, irrational, emotional, selfish, and sometimes mean. We as a species have complex emotions that can get in the way, especially when under intense pressure to perform.

Geoff, an entrepreneur in the digital health space, sums up how he approaches building his team:

The most important aspect to get right is working style. Your team has to have a compatible work style or all sorts of problems can occur. Of course, everyone has to be able to do the job but the way they do the job matters as well. Teams with incompatible work styles will have more conflict.

Geoff’s advice makes a lot of sense if you realize that a fast-paced startup environment is going to create tensions that will test each and every person on the team. Throw in work style differences and miscommunications are bound to happen. These miscommunications can lead to infighting and assumptions that make it hard to zig and zag when conditions change.

Choosing the right people even extends to your investors.

CB Insights published an interesting article on how to choose between two startups. Test #2 is whether or not the investors/VC are any good, based on quantitative evidence, of performance.

If deciding between 2 startups and one is backed by investors with a recent and solid track record and one is backed by investors who don’t have a track record, performance wins. Of course, one key thing here is recent track record. If their best investments were in 1999, that doesn’t count either.

It’s equally valid to make sure that the investors you are around are talented since they are a valuable part of your team.

It’s tempting to jump right into an awesome idea with a smart team of people. I did just that with one of the companies I formed. We had over 20 “founders” and it made it that much more challenging to manage. In fact, we had to fire one founder because of work style and direction differences that were apparent early on yet we choose to ignore them.

Even Google has had to change the way it evaluates candidates and manages their teams. Google was famous for experimenting with completely eliminating middle management which in turn threw the entire company into disarray. What Google finally figured out was that managers were important as well as team composition. Project Aristotle was a research project that Google took on to figure out how to build the perfect group. The researchers noticed two behaviors that all the good teams generally shared:

First, on the good teams, members spoke in roughly the same proportion, a phenomenon the researchers referred to as ‘‘equality in distribution of conversational turn-taking.’’ 

Second, the good teams all had high ‘‘average social sensitivity’’ — a fancy way of saying they were skilled at intuiting how others felt based on their tone of voice, their expressions and other nonverbal cues. 

They are sensitive to one another’s moods and share personal stories and emotions. While Team B might not contain as many individual stars, the sum will be greater than its parts.

All of these studies and experiences clearly highlight the important of choosing your co-founders, initial employees and investors with caution. The inertia of employee issues and changing hearts and minds once you get going will make it that much harder to make your idea a reality.
